---
layout: blog
istop: false
book: true
phil: true
title: "齐泽克导读（一）从南斯拉夫到斯洛文尼亚"
background-image: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/61E15MWutdL.jpg
date: 2021-04-04 06:40
category: 读书
tags:
- Ian Parker
- Slavoj Zizek
---

# 从南斯拉夫到斯洛文尼亚

这一章讲南斯拉夫国家的形成、运转和解体，以及西方如何在东欧重新发明资本主义。怎样理解这一过程，怎样看待铁托的崛起与没落、自治社会主义、民族主义抵抗以及新的自由市场道德多数，将影响我们阅读齐泽克和他理解这一过程的方式。推究他的理论来源的不同组合的的轨迹，说明他改写这些理论来源的历史和地理背景，探讨齐泽克对这些理论的运用受到什么局限，怎样才是结合三个理论来源的正确方式。

理论来源本身也是歪曲的，可能本身即已无法反映它生发的时代和世界。问题不只是思想在特定社会情况下如何实现、怎样解释，而且是一些概念集合是怎么综合作用来把它们反映情况的能力发挥到极致和崩溃点的。准确来讲，这里是在勾勒这些理论相互组合时最远的不可能性边界。南斯拉夫历史正是死结和突破的历史，是和不可能性的关系，所以这组概念不应该用来解决或者理顺它们要反映的东西，而是也要用来展现不可能性。所以，关注否定、匮乏和辩证断裂的这三个理论来源如此重要。他的不同概念系统正是首先草草建立于巴尔干的经济政治地形，然后再为外国的学术界读者重建的。

Zizek, after being refused a lecturing post upon completion of his first two degrees in the University of Ljubljana, and then working as a researcher and visitor at different places around the world, at last has a position as Professor in the Department of Philosophy. Now it would be tempting to slide too quickly over what it meant for him to have been ‘politically active in the alternative movement in Slovenia during the 80s’ and to have stood as ‘candidate for the presidency of the republic of Slovenia in the first multi-party elections in 1990’ (as his little biography on the departmental website puts it).3 The years of intellectual and political compromise and challenge in and against Yugoslavia were part of a dialectical process of the making and unmaking of Stalinism. So what we need to grasp, then, are what the conditions of impossibility of Yugoslavia were that made it possible for the Republic of Slovenia to appear, and so what the conceptual conditions were for Zizek to appear as he did both here and there.

How Zizek appears here and there is precisely the issue, for conditions of impossibility also mark the relationship between what we think we see when he appears to us and what has actually been going on in Eastern Europe. This chapter traces the theoretical resources that organised philo- sophical and political work in Yugoslavia and the way these were lived and reworked in Slovenia. If we want to understand what Zizek is up to we need a good historical account, not to sum him up or explain him away but to cut our way through the circuits of lies that have structured how Yugoslavia has often appeared to the West. Then something different that includes Zizek can appear to us, something we can mark our own theoretical positions against.



THE PERFECTION OF THE STATE



How can we begin to make sense of these conditions? Maybe like this: Tito steered the Yugoslav revolution towards a more open, democratic form of self-management socialism, during which it was necessary to break with Stalinist bureaucratic traditions and adopt a third-way non-aligned position between capitalism and communism. The problem is that this character- isation is wrong in almost every respect, but different versions of this representation of the Yugoslav state for its own populations, and such images of Yugoslavia for the West, have served to spin a mythology that was potent enough to stifle opposition for many years, and to discredit Marxism fairly efficiently along the way.4

Actually, the respect in which this characterisation is right lies not in any of the particular elements of the description but in the space that the

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 13



mythology opened up. This paradox, a space in which dissident academics were able to take the bureaucracy at its word and enact the very freedoms it claimed to endorse, struck at the heart of one of the impossible points where the hypocrisy of the regime could then be made to implode. In Slovenia, the northernmost republic in the Yugoslav Federation, Zizek was one of those who noticed that the regime required its population to take a cynical distance from the claims it made about democracy in order for it to function. This requirement meant that an enthusiastic embrace of democratic claims – in practices of ‘overidentification’ – might be able to open up and detonate the ideological apparatus from the inside. We will look at strategies of resistance like this in more detail later, but for the moment we need to dismantle the different aspects of the structurally- necessary symbolic deception that enabled the bureaucracy to seize and hold power until it started to disintegrate in the 1980s.



What the Yugoslav resistance was already locked into
The personality cult constructed around the figure of Josip Broz Tito, a Croatian locksmith drawn to Marxism and then swiftly into the Comintern

– the Communist Third International – during his time in Moscow, itself testifies to the Stalinist cast of the Tito regime in Yugoslavia. Tito worked as a Comintern agent with responsibility for the Balkans, and became secretary of the Communist Party in Yugoslavia in 1937. Tito was even groomed at one point to be the leader of the Comintern to succeed Stalin, and it is worth recalling that there was a good deal of grotesque adoration of this single individual from before the break with Stalin in 1948 through to his death in 1980. The bizarre doubling of the image of the leader – modelled on Stalin yet with the pretence that he was in some sense the more progressive reverse image – already introduces into the symbolic texture of Yugoslav politics a particular kind of duplicity.

Up to the point of the expulsion of the Yugoslav Party from the Cominform, Tito was quite explicitly a good Stalinist. The Cominform, or ‘Communist Information Bureau’, was set up in 1947 as replacement and successor to the Comintern, which had been dissolved in 1943. That dissolution was partly as a goodwill gesture to the capitalist world, and a message to the West that the Soviet Union was willing to embark on a period of ‘peaceful coexistence’ during which it could get on with the task of building ‘socialism in one country’, and thus demanding that the local communist parties subordinate their activities to the needs and diplomatic manoeuvres of the Soviet bureaucracy. For Tito, what being a good Stalinist meant until 1948 was to respect the compromises made with the imperialist powers, including agreement between Stalin and Churchill as to how

14 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



Europe would be apportioned between the Western and the Soviet spheres of influence.5

Yugoslavia would then be neutralised as a threat to both sides, and function as part of the buffer zone. The Communist Party in Italy, which was clearly assigned to the West, and bordering on Slovenia as a component of the new Federative People’s Republic of Yugoslavia, dutifully handed over its arms to its government. In Greece, which was also assigned to the West, bordering on Tito’s southernmost republic (now Macedonia), a bitter civil war broke out between the Western-backed government and partisans. The Stalinists were then torn between instruc- tions from Moscow to stifle revolutionary activity and communists on the ground who refused to hand over their weapons, particularly in the north of the country (Greek Macedonia).

The West had already assumed that Yugoslavia would adhere to the diplomatic agreements made between Moscow and London in 1944, which was when the Allies and the Yugoslav government in exile stopped their military aid to the Chetniks – the Serb ‘Royal Army in the Homeland’ dedicated to the elimination or expulsion of traitors and implicated in massacres of Croats and Muslims, as well as Gypsies and Jews.6 Support from London then went to Tito’s Partisans in the Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia, with collaboration continuing well after the war was over, to the extent that captured Chetnik and Croatian fascist Ustashe7 would be handed over to Tito to be executed. What we need to keep focused on here is the way that despite Tito’s refusal to close down the ‘proletarian brigades’ in the Partisan forces, there was no intention of breaking from the Stalinist conception of historical stages of development, in which there was the notion that proletarian revolution should be delayed until there had been a sustained period of bourgeois rule.8

This is not to say that there was no conflict between Tito’s partisans and Stalin as early as 1941, when the Soviet Union was still negotiating directly with the Royal Yugoslav Government in exile. Every local Stalinist apparatchik at that time had to manage the extremely difficult task of balancing orders from Stalin with what was actually possible, what activists on the ground would accept.9 The Tito–Subasich Agreement for a coalition regime that would keep Yugoslavia on track for its capitalist stage of development at the end of the war would conform to the cynical conceptual distortions of Marxism emanating from Moscow, but this meant that any mention of ‘socialism’ by the partisans, and then by the new government, had to be carefully guarded. The eventual re-designation of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1963 was then designed to mark sym- bolically the ‘socialist’ character of the regime as, we might say, drawing on a favourite phrase from Zizek, ‘precisely the reverse’ of what it actually

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 15



was. There had been no revolutionary overthrow of capitalist property relations, rather a neutralising of the ‘proletarian brigades’ and stabilising of the economy, initially as capitalist and then as a bureaucratically- regulated market system.

What we are unravelling here, then, are the conditions of impossibility in which things are in many key respects precisely the reverse of what they seem to be. Because there had been no socialist revolution, there was no process of degeneration from the conditions of thriving democracy that flourished all too briefly during the October 1917 revolution in Russia.10 Instead, the state that was instituted in Yugoslavia first stabilised capitalism and then assimilated it to the needs of the bureaucracy. As was the case with other countries in Eastern Europe (those that had less space for market mechanisms to operate) this process of ‘structural assimilation’11 of Yugoslavia to the mould of the Stalinist command economies meant that it occupied some kind of temporal space between capitalism and socialism, as a state that was a parody of both.

Staging the myth of the Yugoslav state
One of the structurally-necessary founding myths of the Yugoslav state, part of the symbolic apparatus of Stalinist rule after the break with Stalin in 1948, was that Tito had led a revolutionary movement that defied Moscow by carrying through a socialist transformation of society. The Tito–Stalin split actually arose over trade and military relations between Yugoslavia and the USSR at a time when Stalin was attempting to consolidate his grip over the buffer zone between his sphere of influence and the West. In Yugoslavia the seizure of power by the Communist Party already made its status as a fully-fledged capitalist power untenable. It is instructive to note that while Greece had by this time been engulfed in civil war, with Stalin’s agents attempting to stifle all-out opposition to capitalist rule, there was a significant exception to the rule of different spheres of influence on the borders of both Greece and Yugoslavia. This significant exception was Albania. Stalin wanted Albania absorbed into Yugoslavia after the war, but the Tito–Stalin split saw Enver Hoxha’s incredibly repressive Tirana-based regime ally with Stalin. It was only when there was some rapprochement between the USSR and Yugoslavia in the early 1960s that Hoxha constructed a new destiny for himself as the only Leninist in the region, and sided with China during the Sino–Soviet split.12

The material, economic-political status of Albania in relation to Yugoslavia can easily be re-described in terms of Serbia’s fantasmatic points of traumatic origin in Kosovo, and we will consider these later. These are issues that have been fairly crucial to Zizek’s account of what drove Serbia under Slobodan Milosevic. What it is important to emphasise for the

16 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



time being is that ‘Albania’ already figures here as some kind of sticking point – even as a symptom we might say – of the historical foundation of the Yugoslav state. A symptom is a point of symbolic condensation of conflict that causes anguish but which has a function, and so it is difficult, perhaps impossible without the disintegration of the identity founded upon it, to give up. What is being symbolically condensed in ‘Albania’ and ‘Kosovo’ for the Serbs in Yugoslavia is crucial, but already we can see how these places were functioning for the Yugoslav state, ostensibly integrated but operating as points of conflict. The partisans took power in Albania without any military support from the Red Army, but no one would try to pretend that Hoxha’s was not a quintessentially Stalinist regime.13 Tito’s regime, which was formed with the help of the Red Army, then had to spin much rhetoric and spill some blood to persuade its supporters that it had really distanced itself from Stalinism.

It is easy to confuse the nationalisation of enterprises as part of the reconstruction of the economy in Yugoslavia after the Second World War with socialism, but we need to keep in mind the early attempts by Tito to remain faithful to a Stalinist stage conception of history, in which the primary task of the regime was the stabilisation of capitalism, if we are to understand how ‘self-management’ of the economy was to flourish later on. The stabilisation of capitalism turned out to be but a precursor to the instal- lation of the bureaucracy as the only way that Tito could maintain power after the break with Stalin. This ‘workers’ state’ was forced to carry out the task of subjugating capitalism as the overtly dominant mode of production, but only so it could also keep control of the workers or any dangerous aspirations to socialist democracy. The main theoretician of ‘self- management’, the Slovenian Edvard Kardelj, had been one of Tito’s comrades during the partisan struggle, and his history with Tito as an economic policy advisor was to prove useful. He had a good track record in political spin, making the management of dissent and the steering of a pragmatic political course appear to be in line with anti-capitalist struggle. To advertise the success of the Yugoslav model as ‘democracy and socialism’, as Kardelj later did,14 requires some breathtaking facility with signifiers. On the one hand, of course, the absence of democracy and the presence of a corrupt and secretive police apparatus15 meant that signifiers like ‘democracy’ could be juggled around by the regime without much opposition – with the exception, as we have already noted, that the opponents of the regime might take the rhetoric of democracy too seriously and actually hold the regime to its word. One thing the opposition, in Belgrade and Zagreb as well as Ljubljana, was able to notice from the 1960s was that words are dangerous things, dangerous to the regime. On the other hand, the presence of ‘socialism’ in this description of ‘self-

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 17



management’ was predicated on the denationalisation of economic enterprises.16 That is, the use of the signifier ‘socialism’ rested on practices that required the absence of anything actually approaching socialism. The signifier was thus evacuated of the content that Western leftists usually summon up when they appeal to socialism. Self-management, as we shall see, was to have some fairly disastrous effects, with incitement to competition between enterprises accelerating into a wider centrifugal force that central state repression was eventually unable to contain.

The break from Moscow did give the Tito regime some measure of free play in its handling of internal dissent, and this included a little less pressure from the West over the policing of political opposition in return for a little more obedience to the West over its own policing of spheres of influence in other parts of the world. Yugoslavia was admitted to the UN Security Council, and in 1950 backed imperialist intervention in Korea. What we should notice here is that Yugoslavia’s status as a ‘non-aligned’ country meant that it could play itself against the Soviet Union and the West, with the proviso that it kept its own populations in check so as not to disturb that delicate balancing act. The sixth party congress in 1952 changed the name of the Communist Party to the ‘League of Communists of Yugoslavia’, and there was some open discussion at the seventh congress in 1958 as to whether it would be possible to introduce a multi-party system in the federation. The answer was no, multi-party democracy would not be appropriate, and it was this congress that opted formally for ‘self- management’ as an economic-political system.

Yugoslavia operating in this buffer zone between the USSR and the

West perfectly displays the characteristics of ‘civilisation’ described by Freud in Civilization and Its Discontents. Civilisation is able to manage an individual’s desire for aggression by ‘weakening and disarming it and by setting up an agency within him to watch over it, like a garrison in a conquered city’.17 One of the problems is that outsiders need to be constantly reassured that diplomatic relations with them will be maintained, and so any internal dissent, perceived as aggression, must be strictly contained. And this kind of state apparatus, which monitors its own population for fear that hostile messages and impulses might be sent into the outside world, requires a strict separation between the observing apparatus and its inhabitants. At the very least, it means that any ‘self- management’ can only operate as a form of self-discipline, where the agency of the super-ego (which is what Freud is talking about here) is relayed into the interior of each particular subject so that they will each take responsibility for managing themselves.

This then is exactly the setting for the management of disciplined, self- regulating individuals described by Michel Foucault.18 Perhaps it is not

18 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



surprising that Foucault would be one of the theoretical reference points for the opposition movement in Yugoslavia in the 1980s, in Slovenia at least. Foucault’s account of discipline and confession would, however, need to speak to the particularity of conditions at this edge of Europe. What is for sure is that this process of formation of the Yugoslav state is far from any dismantling of the state machine proposed by Marx in the course of proletarian revolution. Tito was able to dismantle the ‘proletarian brigades’, and so to accomplish, instead of the overthrow of capitalism, the taking over and perfection of the state.19

In and against the state
The conceptual reference points picked up and elaborated by Zizek during the 1980s were already embedded in the fabric of the ideological apparatus of the Yugoslav regime. And Zizek himself was at times embedded in this apparatus. After completing his first degree in philosophy and sociology at the University of Ljubljana in 1971 he completed his MA thesis on ‘The theoretical and practical relevance of French structuralism’ in 1975, only to find that he was deemed ideologically unsuitable for a lecturing appointment by the authorities. He was supported for a while by his parents, who were apparently hard-line communists.20 He made some money translating philosophy from German, until he found some more secure work in 1977, a job with the Central Committee of the Slovenian League of Communists which included writing speeches for the bureaucracy. This work, which included taking minutes for committee meetings and assisting with the odd speech, producing the very forms of symbolic apparatus that he was then to critique, not only gave him some inside working knowledge of the party apparatus at the level of the republic, but he was also able to obtain financial support for attendance at academic conferences abroad.21 This history of Yugoslavia is not designed simply to explain in some way why Zizek writes what he writes, as if we could drain it of its broader relevance. Rather, this reading of how the symbolic space that was Yugoslavia was fabricated around certain kinds of lies and points of impos- sibility is a reading that also includes those from the West who gaze in at what is happening now in the new republics. The West had a key stake in the alienation of Tito from Stalin, and it was then to have a fairly important role in the separation of Slovenia from the Federation. We need to keep our eye on that process if we are not to fall into one of the simplest and most seductive explanations of the break-up of Yugoslavia, which is that deep ethnic rivalries always lay under the surface ready to explode into life when the socialist system broke apart. The image of the break-up of Yugoslavia as driven by atavistic rivalries also keys into one of the most powerful ideological explanations for conflict under capitalism. The films

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 19‌



of Emir Kusturica set in the warring communities of Bosnia-Herzegovina, such as Underground, function ideologically in exactly this way,22 and the hopeless plaint that all sides are to blame made by some radicals in the West is just as problematic. The question that would take Freud’s account of the garrison in the conquered city further, and bring it into contact with later psychoanalytic theory – specifically Lacan’s – would be how the very aggression that the observing agency fears is brought to life in the first place. The protection of the nation in these circumstances always also requires the intensification of control and violence directed against women as signifiers of the nation – through motherhood and the reproduction of future generations.23 The semi-autonomous women’s organisations of the partisan struggle that evolved into the Union of Women’s Associations were abolished in 1961, and ‘The Conference for the Social Activities of Women’ was set up by the Party. Abortion, which had been made freely available after 1974 but used as a form of contraception, came under attack towards the end of the 1980s. By the early 1990s the independent women’s networks ceased functioning across the different republics. Military violence was reflected and reproduced by increasing violence against women, and anti-war groups

in Belgrade like ‘Women in Black’ were often physically attacked.24 Antagonism between communities was thus intimately interwoven with

antagonism between men and women, a phenomenon that Lacanian theory was to describe in terms of the deadlocks of ‘sexuation’.25 The role of ‘sexuation’ and feminist responses to the violence provoked and unleashed by the state pose problems for Marxists making sense of the break-up of Yugoslavia, and for those using Zizek’s work. How is the libidinal economy of the state constituted such that there is an impossible relation- ship between its component parts, which then becomes filled with malevolent fantasies of rivalry and revenge? To answer that question we need to narrow our focus now from the formation of Yugoslavia to the particular problem of Serbia.



BROTHERHOOD AND UNITY



There was a further serious complication in the case of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which was that the perfection of the state also entailed the reproduction of the imperfection of relationships between each separate state in the Federation. The care taken in selecting signifiers to designate the different state components of the Federation indicates something of the problem. There were five ‘nations’ with their own Republic as home reference point – Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Slovenia – and nine different recognised ethnic categories by the early 1980s, which include some that do not easily correspond to a geographical

20 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



area: as well as Croat, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Serbian and Slovenian, the other ethnic groups were Hungarians mainly in the province of Vojvodina, Albanians mainly in Kosovo,26 and Muslims (‘a national category which refers to the South Slav population converted to Islam during Ottoman rule’)27 to be found mainly in Bosnia.28 There was also the ethnic self-designation ‘Yugoslav’, which more than doubled in size between 1971 and 1981, as some indication that new identities could be forged.29

Identity traps and the language of ethnic domination
Tito’s well-worn phrase ‘brotherhood and unity’30 – which was to be taken up later by Milosevic and injected with more sinister content – simultane- ously expressed something of the project of Yugoslavia as a federation, and ‘repressed’, we might say, the dominance of Serbia. Although the Communist Party had formally abandoned its early position, from 1919 to 1923, which was then in favour of a centralised state that would dissolve national particularities into a new Yugoslav nation,31 traces of old Great Serb chauvinism remained embedded in the workings of the state when the Party took power. The nature of this ‘repression’ needs to be carefully spelled out if we are not to lapse into some kind of collectivised conspir- atorial image of the Serbian psyche. On the one hand, the iron grip of Tito, a Croat, meant that there was occasion enough for Serbian nationalists to complain that the Communist Party and then the League of Communists were plotting against the interests of the nation. For example, the shift from the project for a centralised state to a federation followed, in part, from a similar shift of policy in the Soviet Union, and the Comintern had to exert some pressure during the 1920s to bring the Yugoslav party into line.32

In this sense, a certain degree of ‘repression’ of the ambitions of the Serb nationalist current did take place, and the later triumphant emergence of this current around Milosevic could be understood in a very loose (and not a very psychoanalytic) way, as the ‘return of the repressed’. The subjugation of Albanian activists in Kosovo after the Second World War was also a concession to Serb sensitivities that linked repression with an incitement to resistance, to the ‘return’ of what had been shut out. On the other hand, the structural dominance of Serbia within the different forms of state apparatus was organised in such a way that complaints against it would seem to be unreasonable if not traitorous; the stage was set for those with most privilege to interpret opposition as a provocation, and for interpreta- tion of responses to that provocation as the justifiable exercise of what might be seen as ‘defence mechanisms’.

There are quite evident issues of language here. While Slovenian had

been viewed as but a dialect of Serbo-Croat by the party in the 1920s, the complex patchwork of ‘nations’, ‘nationalities’ and ‘national minorities’

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 21



recognised by the League of Communists did include recognition of different languages. However, while the writing of Serbo-Croat in Serbia was in Cyrillic script – that is, the notation adopted in the Soviet Union as well as Bulgaria – in Croatia the Roman alphabet was used. And the different material inscription of signifiers which marked the presence of either of the two different main ethnic groups was quite explicitly at work in the military apparatus. The military command structure used Cyrillic script, and the argument that there would be less confusion if only this single alphabet was used also served to privilege Serbs within the military. The different republics had their own Territorial Defence Forces but did not have their own armies (and the Federal army was controlled from Belgrade). We do not, then, even have to bring into play claims that Serbs in the different parts of the Federation were preponderant because they were more attracted to military life33 in order to understand how this privilege was repetitively inscribed in the relations between the different nations. One of the key trials in the 1980s in Slovenia was conducted in Serbo-Croat, on the basis that it was a military trial; but by this time the manoeuvre simply served to make more visible domination by Belgrade.



Self-management in practice
There was a fatal paradox in the economic functioning of the Yugoslav state which meant that a loosening of control by Belgrade served to intensify competition between the different republics. The ostensible shift from a ‘planned economy’ and control over the private sector before the break with Stalin, to the implementation of self-management, required an abandonment of state ownership and collectivisation of agriculture, a ‘reliance on market mechanisms’, the ‘increased use of financial instruments’ and decentrali- sation of budgeting, the free distribution of income locally and the ‘rehabilitation of consumer sovereignty’.34 Central economic control was eventually relaxed to the point where banks and economic enterprises in the different republics had to take responsibility for budgeting and financial management. The allocation of responsibility to a local level, where the republics were expected to be self-supporting, meant that a prerequisite for this form of ‘socialism’ was intense competition.

By the 1980s there were marked regional differences in levels of unem- ployment and indices of economic growth between the different republics. Kosovo was quite badly off, as were parts of Serbia (the exception being Belgrade), and Slovenia was way ahead of the other republics.35 This made political attempts to exercise economic control from Belgrade even more transparent as the opposition movements gained strength during the 1980s. There was much unnecessary duplication of industrial production for local, pragmatic political reasons, and decisions made at the centre

22 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



exacerbated the situation. Steel production, for example, had been shifted by the bureaucrats from Slovenia to Bosnia, and this meant that it then became cheaper to import steel than produce it within the country.36

Self-management also contained within it a centrifugal dynamic, in which the articulation of dissent would come to be necessarily linked to dis- satisfaction with Serbian control. The absence of any arena for open democratic discussion across the Federation – that is, the prohibition on organising on a party-political basis across the borders of the republics – meant that opposition could only be aired locally, within the republics and against the centre. Any demand for universal democratic rights then tended to be distorted, ‘particularized, “nationalized”’, as it entered the political stage.37 Belgrade was faced with local resistance not only from the more economically advanced republics, Slovenia being the most outstanding example. There were more pressing problems facing Belgrade by the 1980s, which included holding onto Kosovo, a poor and backward part of Yugoslavia but operating as a much more potent indicator of Serb integrity than Slovenia. We will turn in a moment to examine in greater detail the emergence of the resistance movement in Slovenia – that, after all, is where we will get a better sense of the economic-political coordinates from which Zizek views the world. But we do first need to look a little closer at the issue of Kosovo.

Zizek’s first writings for the Left in the English-speaking world provided some Lacanian coordinates for making sense of ‘the re-emergence of national chauvinism in Eastern Europe as a kind of “shock absorber” against the sudden exposure to capitalist openness and imbalance’,38 but before we translate what was happening into Zizek’s particular dialect of Lacanese (something we will only be able to do in sufficient detail in Chapter 3) we need to know how the particular nationalist obsession Milosevic had with Kosovo could have been turned into something susceptible to a psychoanalytic reading in the first place.

The Italian occupation of parts of Yugoslavia during the Second World War – a division between Italy and Germany that also put Ljubljana under Italian jurisdiction – had brought together on common land the Albanian population in Kosovo and what was to become Enver Hoxha’s Stalinist fiefdom next door. Tito’s envoy to Kosovo and Macedonia in 1943 reported that the conditions for partisan military struggle against fascism were more difficult in Kosovo because the local population feared a return to Serbian rule. The state had used systematic terror before the Second World War to make Albanians emigrate from Kosovo to Turkey or to Albanian territory.39 Serb and Montenegrin settlers also continued to dominate the local Communist Party apparatus inside Kosovo, and there was a clearly expressed wish on the part of the Albanian partisans that Kosovo should be

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 23



integrated into a new unified Albanian republic after the war. However, Tito chose to placate the Serb population, as part of the project of stabilising Yugoslavia in line with Stalin’s demand that the country should fall within the Western sphere of influence, and promises made to the Albanian resistance movement were reneged on in 1945.40 An uprising against the new Yugoslav military occupation was crushed. Kosovo was given limited regional autonomy in 1946, but there was further repression in 1956, which saw about one hundred killed by the security forces, and display of the Albanian national flag was punishable by imprisonment until 1966.41

Stains purged by the pure
We have already noted how Albania became a Stalinist reverse image of the Yugoslav regime, itself a doppelganger of the Soviet regime. Albania was thus a remainder and reminder of the Tito–Stalin split, itself split between Stalin’s loyal ally Hoxha and a seething population inside Yugoslav borders subject to Serb government. It was then, in the context of the revival of Serb nationalism, that charges of ‘ethnic cleansing’ first started to be raised against Albanians in Kosovo. A petition by Belgrade intellec- tuals and church representatives in 1986 demanded ‘the right to spiritual identity, to defence of the foundations of Serb national culture and to the physical survival of our nation on its land’.42

Charges of ‘ethnic cleansing’ and accusations of rape made against Albanians also draw attention, of course, to the explicit and implicit agendas of the burgeoning ‘moral majorities’ in the republics. Struggles over the control of land and anxieties about diminishing populations of the different ethnic groups did also quickly mobilise motifs of the ‘community’ and the ‘family’, and so of the position, role and responsibility of women. In these conditions of national threat, ‘women are pronounced both culprits and victims’; the tragedy of the Croatian nation, for example, was blamed on ‘women, pornography and abortion’ by the ‘Croatian Democratic Community’, which came to power in the republic’s multi-party elections in 1990.43 While the actual position of women in Eastern Europe did not in practice correspond much to the claims about equality between the sexes made by the Stalinist bureaucrats,44 the nationalist movements that swept to power as the bureaucracy disintegrated revelled in images of the woman as bearer of children for the homeland.45 Here too, however, we need to take care not to see these reactionary images as bubbling up as if they were instinctual natural desires that were only then quelled by the state. In fact, during those ‘socialist’ times, ‘the state-control process of social- ization and the mistrust of the family as the agent of socialization paradoxically coincided with elements of traditional patriarchal ideology’.46 What the new nationalist movements were able to do was to bring to

24 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



fruition the desire for authentic motherhood – itself an ideological fantasy

that had been both incited and frustrated by the bureaucracy.

There is another potent ideological motif that was able to mobilise and divide the ethnic communities in the republics, that of anti-semitism. But the image of the ‘Jew’ during the times of disintegration of Yugoslavia had a particular quality that will be worth bearing in mind when we turn to Zizek’s theoretical account of the role of anti-semitism under capitalism. Massacres of Jews were carried out both by the Croatian Ustashe and by the Serb Chetniks during the periods of fascist occupation, and the image of rootless cosmopolitanism figured powerfully enough in the purges conducted by Stalin and in the anti-semitic pogrom planned by him just before he died in 1953. The ‘Jew’ operated as a specific identifiable cos- mopolitan category that cannot be completely assimilated to any of the republics and cannot be counted on to be loyal to the host community.

There is a further complex, contradictory series of significations given to the figure of the Jew in the conflict between the Yugoslav republics, providing a convenient displacement and reinforcement of anti-semitism. One aspect of this can be found in the condensed images in Serb discourse about Albanians as ‘dirty, fornicating, rapacious, violent, primitive’ and Slovenians as ‘non-productive merchants’, condensed images which amount to something worse, like the stereotypical image of the Jew.47 In the Croat imagination there is another set of condensations, in which the Serbs are conspiring with the Jews to cheat them. Yet another bizarre facet of this ideological process, a mirror-image of these attributions, which serves to refract and repeat particular forms of anti-semitism, is that the Serbs sometimes position themselves as ‘Jews’, as the ‘chosen people’ of Yugoslavia. In this self-positioning (a positioning that also serves to confirm the conspiracy theories of the Croats) the Albanians are Muslim ‘terrorists’ who want to drive the Serbs from Kosovo in much the same way as the Arabs are supposed to be trying to drive the Jews out of Israel.48 The collusion of the different sections of the bureaucratic apparatus in these fantasies of ethnic purity and gender in the name of ‘communism’ made the task of those critics on the left who saw Stalinism as a distortion of Marxism very difficult. (We will examine Zizek’s relation to Marxism in more detail in Chapter 4.)

If, in the eyes of many, Marxism was already efficiently discredited by

the Yugoslav regime (which implemented free-market competition between different enterprises and republics in the name of ‘self-management socialism’), the Left had still more shocks to come. In 1987, editors of Praxis International publicly defended their decision to sign the appeal for Serbian rights in Kosovo a year earlier. The Praxis group, based in Belgrade, had been the critical conscience of the Left inside Yugoslavia, and

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 25



it brought together Marxist intellectuals who refused to allow the regime to co-opt completely the word ‘Marxism’ as part of its ideological legiti- mation strategies.49 Their appeal for Serbian rights marked a shift from Marxism to nationalism, and played on the idea that Serbs were being ‘cleansed’ from Kosovan villages. In fact, as of 1987, when Milosevic came to power, even the evidence for such a campaign of ‘ethnic cleansing’ directed by Albanians against Serbs was very flimsy.50 Kosovo was rapidly becoming a touchstone for the integrity of the Serbian nation. An ‘Appeal for Protection of the Serb population and its Holy Places in Kosovo’ issued by the Serbian Orthodox Church in 1982 had already ratcheted up the pressure in terms that are hauntingly similar to the theoretical elaborations of Zizek on the role that Kosovo plays as object cause of desire for the Serbs. The appeal referred to Serbia’s fight for the ‘remembrance of its being’ in Kosovo since 1389, and rehearsed again the Milosevic line that there is ‘no more precious object for the Serb nation, no dearer reality, no more sacred object, past, present or future, than the existence and holiness of Kosovo’.51

It has been suggested that Milosevic’s visit to Kosovo in April 1987 for a party delegate meeting was a turning point in the development of Serb nationalism and the ‘reactivation of the Serb’s chosen trauma’.52 This psy- choanalytic account, which is far from a Lacanian or Zizekian reading, does usefully draw attention to some key motifs and problems. It was after 13 hours listening to tales of victimisation at the hands of Albanians that Milosevic became converted to the mythical anchoring point of Serb identity in the battle with the Turks at the battle of Kosovo in 1389. Milosevic ‘emerged from this experience a transformed person, wearing the armor of Serb nationalism’,53 and then, with the decision to bring the body of Lazar, the hero of the 1389 battle, on a tour of Serb villages and towns, the ‘chosen trauma’ that had ‘been kept alive throughout the centuries’ was brought to life. This is how events in the 1980s served to reactivate ‘affects’ (intense bodily states that we experience as distinct emotions) connected with ‘traumatized self-images’.54

Our concern here is not with the historical accuracy of the story of the battle of Kosovo, but with how the story came to be transmitted through the generations as a binding force of identity for the Serbs. The key issue is how this ‘affect’ could be transmitted and reactivated 500 years later. The only way to answer this question without resorting to some kind of genetic or telepathic account is to treat the ‘reactivation’ as a process that comes to fix something unbearable and incomprehensible, to make it real retroac- tively. That retroactive production of the event in the past so that it will then be felt to have ‘caused’ the traumatic affect in the present is exactly how Freud accounts for the appearance of a symptom. This retroactive

26 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



production of trauma is something that was discovered by Lacan in his return to Freud, and has been used to good effect in Zizek’s work. There is still, however, another precipitating cause that is necessary for a figure like Milosevic to be drawn to an event like this as a traumatic moment and for the Serb population to circle around it lamenting what has been done to them, so that they could feel driven to wreak revenge on all those who remind them of their abject condition. In this way ‘trauma’ comes to function as a point of origin for collective history and individual experience.

Theoretical resistance and political practice
As Zizek points out with respect to the civil war,55 we need a ‘theoretical framework’ if we are not to get facts wrong. A simple recitation of ‘what happened when’ is likely to lead us into factual errors as well as conceptual ones. If we are using a theoretical framework like psychoanalysis, however, we also need to be able to account for how the conceptual assumptions within it can actually come to be operative. If psychoanalytic explanation of any kind is to be put to work, we need to know how the different elements of it come to be so potent. The structuring of the political field has come to be articulated in such a way that psychoanalytic explanation works. Psychoanalytic subjectivity – an experience of something shut out from everyday discourse – appears when populations have been wrenched from the land and their labour power alienated from them in the course of capitalist development. These irrevocably divided subjects then witness the return of the repressed from what has been constituted in these new conditions of impossibility as something ‘unconscious’ to them. It is in these conditions that the nostalgic yearning for some organic sense of connection with community through the motif of the nation comes to function not only at an ideological level but also, and as a condition for its ideological appeal, at the level of affect.56

The same point about the role of theory applies to readings of Hegel, for which the distinction between three main classes would appear to provide an almost perfect ideological image and a good deal of solace to bureaucrats administering the buffer states in Eastern Europe. For Hegel, the ‘agricul- tural class’ comprised nobles and peasants, the ‘business class’ capitalists and workers, and the ‘universal class’ was composed of civil servants.57 We know how seductive it is to portray society as bringing together workers and employers as if they had common interests,58 and it was exactly this shared interest between the two components of the ‘business class’ that was contested by Marx.

We may also imagine how attractive an image of shared interests between the business class and the ‘universal class’ of administrators, charged with shepherding the business class and agricultural classes, would be to Stalinist

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 27



apparatchiks. It would, perhaps, be all the more appealing to those in Yugoslavia seeking intellectual comfort from the idea that they occupied the position of the enlightened ‘universal class’, that of the bureaucracy. The development of ‘self-management’ accomplished the blurring of class dis- tinctions between employers and workers, and the subordination of the workers’ organisations to the imperative of business.59 The attempt to provide some reflexive self-critique of what was happening in Yugoslavia by describing the emergence of the bureaucracy as a ‘new class’ would then simply serve to legitimate this displacement from Marxist to Hegelian categories.60

The conceptual architecture of Yugoslav society was able to sustain these various ideological trends, but as the state started to disintegrate the fault lines in the texture of life under the bureaucracy started to become lines of battle. And it is then that we see the conditions of impossibility for the Yugoslav state also start to operate as conditions of possibility for Zizek’s combination of Hegel, Lacan and Marx to become effective, not only as legitimation but also as critique.

Zizek’s account of the break-up of Yugoslavia in 1990, first published in New Left Review,61 uses a Lacanian frame first to describe the ‘theft of enjoyment’,62 in which what was never possessed in the first place is felt to be stolen by others. For psychoanalysis, the object of desire after which we unconsciously strive is always already a ‘lost object’, never having had an empirical reality but functioning as a fantasmatic lure, as if it were something we did once enjoy. The way Zizek develops the Lacanian take on this idea to render it into something compatible with Marxism requires a separate discussion, something we will return to in Chapter 3. But for now, what we can see in Zizek’s account is a description of national antagonism that has already been structured into the Yugoslav state apparatus and its forms of ideological legitimation.

On the one hand, Zizek insists that the notion ‘theft of enjoyment’ does not only apply to the ‘backward’ Balkans but is also applicable to political processes exemplified by patterns of US ideology in the 1980s. In this respect, the clustering of ideological fantasy around our own special national ‘Thing’ that is felt to be under threat is portrayed as something that will explode into life – life as deathly hatred of others – whenever capitalism goes into crisis. One of the key features of capitalism, of course, is that it is always in ‘crisis’. Its ‘innermost antagonistic character’ makes it function as an economic system that provokes ever newer needs that cannot be completely satisfied.63 On the other hand, Zizek offers a thumbnail sketch of Yugoslavia as a ‘case-study’ of this process in which each nationality has ‘built its own mythology narrating how other nations deprive it of the vital part of enjoyment the possession of which would allow it to live fully’.64

28 SLAVOJ ZIZEK‌



The ‘reinvention of democracy’ in Eastern Europe that the West enjoyed so much at the end of the 1980s was thus a reintroduction of the forms of antagonism necessary to capitalist economic organisation. When the lid of ‘totalitarianism’ was lifted, instead of the ‘spontaneous’ eruption of democratic desire that the West keenly looked for, what we saw were ‘more ethnic conflicts, based on the constructions of different “thieves of enjoyment”: as if, beneath the Communist surface, there glimmered a wealth of “pathological” fantasies, waiting for their moment to arrive’.65 What we need to focus on here are the crucial little caveats in Zizek’s account. It is ‘as if’ there were pathological fantasies below the surface, and it is the construction of the different enemies that gives rise to certain kinds of enmity when an imbalance is introduced into the system. There is always a danger when a psychoanalytic account of ethnic hatred is being employed that it will be read as the discovery of biologically wired-in instinctual processes, and the same danger applies to readings of Zizek.66 What we have seen so far, of course, is that the Yugoslav state was constituted around certain forms of structural imbalance, and that the difference between the republics already constructed certain distinctive

forms of ethnic rivalry.

Zizek’s paper concludes with a call for ‘more alienation’, for some distance from the suffocating fantasy of the new capitalist regime as an organic community, and from the corresponding ‘nationalist populism’ that configures every other community outside it as responsible for the ‘theft of enjoyment’; ‘the establishment of an “alienated” state that would maintain its distance from civil society, that would be “formal”, empty, embodying no particular ethnic community’s dream’ would then be a way of ‘keeping the space open for them all’.67 One thing to notice about this proposal is that the call for a ‘distance’ between the state and civil society repeats what Zizek had been calling for well before capitalism had been reintroduced. The strategies of resistance he had been advocating during the 1980s were already being used to contest the local bureaucracy and the grip of the Slovenian League of Communists. So, we shift our attention now from Serbia to Slovenia, to see how that resistance played itself out.



THE SLOVENE SPRINGS



The various points of impossibility in the economic and political relation- ships between the different components of the Yugoslav Federation were brought to breaking point by events well beyond its control: economic crisis in the West, and the political decomposition of the Soviet Union. The International Monetary Fund started to call in the massive debts that the Yugoslav economy had been accumulating when crisis hit the capitalist

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 29



world in the 1980s, a time when several large countries with IMF loans were heading for bankruptcy. The national antagonisms within Yugoslavia were compounded by economic intervention from capitalist economies in Western Europe, particularly Germany. Here, though, we need to bear in mind that one of the effects of economic crisis in capitalism is precisely to exacerbate national rivalries as the different economic systems compete for diminishing resources. Europe and the US had different stakes in the fate of Yugoslavia.

Slovenia prized out by the West
Slovenia in particular was a key economic prize to be seized by the West and incorporated into capitalism. In 1991 it comprised about 8 per cent of the population of Yugoslavia, but was responsible for near on 18 per cent of its gross domestic product. It was the most economically developed and efficient republic. And there were already strong trading links between Slovenia and the West, for it had contributed 30 per cent of exports from Yugoslavia. The ambitions of imperialism to break into Yugoslavia and to absorb the most profitable sectors into its own circuits of production coincided with particular national interests and amenability to free competition inside Slovenia.68 As has already been noted, Slovenia was one of the wealthiest republics and had clearly benefited from the ‘market’ aspect of the Yugoslav ‘socialist’ economy. A consultant with the World Bank and vice-prime minister with the Slovenian government after the secession in 1991 indicated how the different periods of Yugoslav economic policy were viewed from Slovenia. Note that ‘socialism’ figures rather negatively in his account of the different periods of the ‘formal allocation of decision-making in the economy’: ‘administrative socialism’ (from 1945 to 1952), ‘administrative market socialism’ (from 1953 to 1962), ‘market socialism’ (from 1963 to 1973) and ‘contractual socialism’ (from 1974 to 1988).69 The democratisation process during the 1980s in Slovenia can also be connected with its more flexible patterns of economic development, for unlike the other small republics in Yugoslavia, industry is located in a number of provincial centres rather than in the capital Ljubljana, which makes a downturn or closures in one sector more easily absorbable.70

Zizek’s view was that at least until 1991 the West tried to keep Yugoslavia together.71 However it does not seem so clear that the publicly avowed wishes of Washington were necessarily the same as Western European interests. The ten-day conflict between Serbia and Slovenia in 1991, when Belgrade made a last bid to clamp down on opposition forces inside Ljubljana, was resolved fairly easily. Slovenia agreed to delay its secession for three months,72 and Belgrade withdrew. It would seem that while the United States may well have wanted to forestall the fragmentation of

30 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



Yugoslavia – and the evidence that Zizek gives is that he saw US Secretary of State James Baker on television supporting the Yugoslav army73 – this was as much to keep German ambitions in check as anything else. Other Western European countries suspicious about German designs would then also have had all the more reason to be more cautious about Yugoslavia dis- integrating, with the UK, France and Greece for different economic and political reasons lining up with Serbia quite explicitly at different times during the 1980s and early 1990s.74 By 1991 even Milosevic seemed to want to be rid of Slovenia.75 At that point Kosovo was a much more pressing problem for Belgrade, and the ideological imperative to maintain Serb integrity by holding onto its 1389 battlefield and point of traumatic foundation became more important than holding onto Slovenia.

Slovenia is not a big country, with a population of about 1.7 million people at the time it broke from Yugoslavia in 1991. This has consequences for the texture of political life, throwing some light on Zizek’s comments in various interviews about his personal enmities with this or that figure in competing political groups. One estimate of the composition of the different opposition movements in the 1980s, for example, was that the peace movement might have comprised about 20 people and the feminist movement consisted of about a dozen.76 This must also be borne in mind when we read of the activity of campaigns like the Committee for the Protection of Human Rights, which collected 100,000 signatures for the release of editors and journalists from the radical youth magazine Mladina in 1988, during the ‘Slovene spring’, for it indicates something of the scale of mobilisation of people around political issues at that time.77

The birth of theoretical culture
The growth of this opposition movement was very rapid, and there are two distinctive features of the movement that we now find reflected in Zizek’s work. The first is the role of French theoretical resources, and the second is the importance of popular culture. According to one account from within the opposition movement, the 1970s were characterised by, on the one hand, ‘a total depoliticization of society’ and, on the other, widespread involvement in study. One political theoretical current which emerged was concerned with mainly Marxist political economy, and another current – around the journal Problemi – was influenced by Althusser, Foucault and Lacan.78 Zizek and the so-called ‘Slovene Lacanian School’79 were involved with this second theoretical current, and to some extent the political opposition to the bureaucracy in Slovenia was theoretically driven by resources that academics in the West often group together as ‘post-structuralism’.

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 31



Although Zizek has become the most visible figure from that emerging group of political and theoretical activists in Ljubljana, some of the others have clearly played a key role in his writing, and we will have cause to refer to their work in later chapters to explicate further where he comes from and what he is up to. We have already drawn on some of the reflections on gender and feminism in the break-up of Yugoslavia by Renata Salecl, and her discussion of Lacan’s notion of ‘sexuation’ will be important later.80 Alenka Zupancic’s work on Kant includes a sustained discussion of ethics, which provides crucial background to the place of phe- nomenology in Ljubljana.81 The rubric ‘post-structuralism’ is actually quite misleading to characterise the work of Zizek, Salecl or Zupancic, or that of Mladen Dolar or Miran Bozovic, whose interests lie mainly in seventeenth-century philosophy.82

Three ‘imperatives’ emerged from theoretical work carried out during the 1970s.83 First, that there should be a critical examination of the claims made about political economy and self-management that would include study of Marxism and of distortions of Marxist ideas by the ‘socialist’ state. The second concerned the historical formation of the Slovene nation so as to lay bare the ideological effects of claims that it was something ‘natural’ that simply needed to be restored. And the third was a critique of ‘dissidence’ as a phenomenon that simply served to keep the bureaucracy in place. The argument here was that ‘dissidents in East European (and other socialist) societies played a state-constitutive role: that their way of thinking was essentially similar to that of the bureaucratic elite, though with an inverted meaning attached to things’.84 The specific forms of cultural resistance that emerged at the beginning of the 1980s turned opposition to the regime into something that went well beyond the limits of ‘dissidence’.

The resistance movement in Slovenia was characterised by a specific set of cultural reference points, and by an articulation of popular culture as a form of resistance. This resistance took some distinctive and surprising forms. ‘At the beginning was punk’,85 and the appearance of punk in 1977 was later to be seen as the birth of the first new social movement in the country that would challenge the bureaucracy. The appearance of punk culture triggered a new phase in Slovenian politics, and there was a massive politicisation of youth media – Mladina and ‘Radio Student’ – which then hit the Slovene Socialist Youth Alliance (the youth wing of the Slovenian League of Communists).86 By 1986 the Youth Alliance was coming into direct conflict with the League of Communists, and it adopted a 22-point programme for changing Yugoslavia at its congress in 1986.87

One striking example was the formation in the early 1980s of the Neue Slowenische Kunst (NSK), which was a grouping of music, theatre and

32 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



visual arts projects. The band Laibach – the German name for Ljubljana – had already been in trouble with the authorities for wearing Nazi insignia as a direct refusal and provocation of the state (the ripping of political images from their context was also one of the characteristics of punk in the West at that time); the Laibach Kunst manifesto pitted itself against the rest of the Slovenian ‘alternative culture’ scene, and against the realm of ‘dissidence’ as a personal free space in which individuals imagine that they are able to be distant from the party apparatus and so free of its effects. The manifesto called for ‘the principle of conscious rejection of personal tastes, judgements, convictions’, and for ‘free depersonalisation, voluntary acceptance of the role of ideology’.88 A key strategy introduced by Laibach

and one taken up by the different arts projects as part of the ‘retro-avant- garde’ deconstruction of the claims of the state to be socialist, progressive and unassailable – was that of ‘overidentification’.

Overidentification here meant refusal of any distance, the taking of dominant symbolic forms at face value and, through repetition and reflexive considerations of their tactical impact, taking the response of the state to breaking point. Overidentification offered a way of breaking from the deadlock between apologists for the regime and the unwittingly loyal opposition, shattering the strategies of ‘dissidence’ that seemed simply to serve as another alibi for the regime. Through the 1980s the main focus was on state rituals, and in the 1990s the NSK set up its own embassies and consulates. In retrospect, it is now possible to see the phenomenon of the NSK as ‘a kind of theatricalization of a few Zizek theses’,89 but in the 1980s this was ‘the language of the alternative society’. Activists from the NSK did attend Zizek’s lectures, but later insisted that it was Laibach that first used the ‘method’ of overidentification, and that Zizek then theorised what they did.90 There is a twist though, which is that for Zizek overidentifica- tion is but a tactic; it refuses the covertly state-sanctioned position of ‘dissidence’, but only in order to buy time for some more dramatic refusal of power. As we shall see in later chapters, such dramatic refusal is at the level of an individual ‘act’, not really envisaged by him as taking place in the domain of collective political action.

The strategy of overidentification also keys into the way that ‘civil society’ is often understood by Hegelians and Marxists in the ‘Eurocommunist’ tradition, after Antonio Gramsci,91 as operating in opposition to the state. Some trends in the Slovenian opposition did see the constitution of a sphere of civil society as ‘the necessary condition for democracy’.92 This would not only have to be forged in distinction to the way the state tried to articulate all activities within its scope, but also be ‘opposed to any idea of harmonious community’ that would represent nationalist and xenophobic interests. The first of these options – the assim-

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 33



ilation of all activity in civil society to the state so that opposition would be effectively stifled – was a powerful strategy employed by the state during the first half of the 1980s. In fact the Slovenian League of Communists did itself desperately resort to Gramscian rhetoric to try and co-opt the left opposition towards the end of the 1980s.93 Perhaps this is why Zizek holds onto the Hegelian distinction between the state and civil society but refuses the Gramscian attempt to claim civil society as the site for progressive politics. For Zizek, it is civil society that often seems to be the problem, and the mobilisation of civil society against the opposition movement in Slovenia is a warning to those who would idealise it against the state.

This kind of ‘totalitarianism from below’ (at that time mobilised by the state) entailed the often unplanned but efficient suffocation of alternative spaces, ‘initiated, put into practice and executed by the people themselves’, so that the people ‘were the socialist consciousness and the nation’s conscience synthesised’.94 The development of a republic-wide movement for democratic rights, following the formation of the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights campaign to defend those framed in a military show-trial of journalists connected with Mladina and a Slovenian sergeant- major in the Yugoslav army, led to the formation of different political parties in 1988.

The first ‘free’ elections in 1990 saw Demos – an alliance of five different opposition groups – obtain about 55 per cent of the vote, and a Christian Democrat became Prime Minister. The programme of economic ‘shock therapy’ implemented by the new government delighted the IMF and the World Bank, but actually did little more than accelerate the programme already set out by the ‘Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’ in July 1990. According to this programme the measures of economic shock policy

convertibility of the dinar, changes in fiscal policy and restrictive monetary policy – were to be complemented by ‘heterodox shock’ policy which would ‘blow out psychological inflation’ and prepare the population for massive privatisation.95

The triumph of parties set on the goal of turning Slovenia into a thriving capitalist country allied with the West brought into play a different notion of civil society, and Slovenia saw the flourishing of the new ‘moral majorities’.96 The programme of these movements included not only cultural chauvinism, but also the promotion of family life and the celebration of child-bearing mothers who would contribute to the growth of the nation, with consequent restriction of abortion rights and attacks on homosexual ‘degenerates’.97 In this respect the rise of the moral majority in Slovenia paralleled the rise of the right in the other Yugoslav republics. There was also, of course, the not-so-little element of differentiation from

34 SLAVOJ ZIZEK



Serbia as morally governed by the Orthodox Church, for 82 per cent of the population in Slovenia were Catholic. Christianity was also a force ready to be mobilised as part of the project of building the nation. Already in 1991 one commentator writing from Ljubljana noted that women had almost disappeared from politics, with the new mission given to them to produce as many new Slovenes as possible, concluding that ‘the new democracy is male, phallocratic democracy’.98 In the run-up to war with Iraq in 2003, Slovenia was one of the ‘gang of ten’ new capitalist states from Eastern Europe eager to sign a statement of support for US action.



New order
So where was Zizek in the birth of the new order in Slovenia? As we noted earlier, Zizek had been one of the candidates for the collective presidency in the 1990 elections, and had stood on the ticket of the Liberal Party (for which he came within a hair’s breadth of being elected). After the elections he did something that, in his own words, ‘no good leftist ever does’ – he ‘supported the ruling party’ – and by 1995 he was claiming that ‘it was our party that saved Slovenia from the fate of the other former Yugoslav republics’. He had clearly made a choice in this new capitalist context that was informed by a Hegelian view of the difference between the state and civil society. Hegel was suspicious of civil society, and Zizek repeats Hegel in this respect. If it was indeed the case that civil society was then functioning as ‘a network of moral majority, conservatives and nationalist pressure groups, against abortion’, then this ‘real pressure from below’ would need to be countered by the state; as Zizek put it, ‘in Slovenia I am for the state and against civil society!’.99 Here Zizek abandons the tactic of ‘overidentification’ with the state, and opts instead for a straight- forward identification with it; it is as if ‘the establishment of an “alienated” state that would maintain its distance from civil society’100 was a dream come true.

The reinvention of capitalism in Yugoslavia was also, as Zizek pointed out in his 1990 article for New Left Review, a reinvention of ‘democracy’ which the West has enjoyed immensely, and when the Left gazes with such avid desire it is, of course, implicated in the scene. He is understandably touchy about the Left in the West delivering its verdict about strategies that have been adopted by the various movements opposing the Yugoslav state.101 The fascinated gaze of Western liberals on ‘victims’ in Sarajevo during the civil war in Bosnia-Herzegovina was, as he pointed out, a gaze that could not contemplate supporting the victims if they started to fight back. He is most contemptuous about the ‘apparent multi-cultural, neutral, liberal attitude’ which ‘posits itself in a witness role’ and which fails to see

YUGOSLAVIA – TO SLOVENIA 35



that the war after the break-up of Yugoslavia was ‘strictly the result of European cultural dynamics’.102

It should be pointed out, however, that Zizek himself plays to those audiences. His response to the 1999 bombing of Serbia, ‘Against the Double Blackmail’, which was published in New Left Review, for example, complained that the NATO bombing ‘signals the end of any serious role for the UN and Security Council’, and he called for the building of ‘transna- tional political movements’ that would refuse the option of siding with Washington or Belgrade.103 This was music to the ears of the Left campaigning against imperialist intervention, perhaps, and it did seem at the time that Zizek was lending his support to the anti-war movement. There is a significant difference, however, between the two versions; an omission from the original version that circulated on email just before the publication of these articles was the phrase ‘So, precisely as a Leftist, my answer to the dilemma “Bomb or not?” is: not yet ENOUGH bombs, and they are TOO LATE.’104 And in other interviews he is quite happy to say that he has ‘always been in favour of military intervention’.105

When we read Zizek telling a journalist from the West, ‘Do not forget that with me everything is the opposite of what it seems’,106 we should take him at his word. Zizek is contradictory, and my analysis of the contradic- toriness of life at the edge of Yugoslavia is a way of mapping that. Tactical collusion with the Stalinist bureaucracy in order to make a living in the 1970s, and open support for the Slovenian state after the restoration of capitalism in the 1990s, do not at all serve to discredit what Zizek writes; but when he claims to be a Marxist we can respond with some comradely Marxist assessment of the political strategies he has adopted. When he claims to use psychoanalytic theory, we need to examine those claims to see whether they make sense and what the limits might be. Lacanian theory is particularly useful for returning a message to a subject in its reverse form, as truth, returning the message here to Zizek – who says that for him everything is the opposite of what it seems – so that we can treat the claim seriously, as something true rather than a mere joke designed to disarm critics. And the Hegelian rhetoric needs to be assessed in order to determine whether it really is being used for critique or legitimation of the state. We turn to that question in the next chapter.

结尾。
